Add guide for address discovery (#152)
BeardOverflow/msi-ec: docs/device_support_guide.md

# Intro
To get your MSI laptop supported, there are two main methods, one that

> requires windows to be installed, and the other works directly on linux.

Author: it does.

If you have any bios/firmware updates on the official MSI website, and

> you haven't updated yet then **DO NOT UPDATE!** follow the guide first:

Author: i went for the short route because the guide was meant to get people started with as little side info as possible.

> ## Windows method(recommended):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Windows method (recommended):
```

Windows updates from the settings
(windows can't update bios/firmware automatically on MSI
laptops but that doesn't mean you have to update them yourself,
instead continue following the guide).

3. Install the MSI app designed for your laptop: MSI dragon center /
MSI creator center / MSI center / MSI center pro (the correct app
can be found on the support page for your laptop).

4. If you fail at step 3, then you most likely need another app. usually
its AMD Adrenalin software / GeForce Experience (nvidia)/ or intel
equivalent.

5. Once the MSI app is installed, you can test the functions it offers,
like user scenario and battery charge limit.

6. If everything works as expected, download RWEverything:
https://rweverything.com/download/ ![download RWEverything](pics/support_guide/dl_rwe.png)

7.  Launch it as administrator:
![run as admin](pics/support_guide/run_as_admin.png)

8. Navigate to the EC tab (page):
![open ec tab](pics/support_guide/open_ec_tab.png)

9. Here you should see a table of all the values your Embedded Chip has in its memory.\
The values you see can be changed manually (by writing to them)\
\

> DO NOT DO THAT: writing the wrong the values to the wrong address might brick the laptop completely and EC/BIOS RESET CAN'T FIX THAT!<br/>

Author: maybe being straightforward is not the best way to keep people from messing up, i prefer it my way because it sounds scarier. but im not against the change.

> DO NOT DO THAT: writing the wrong the values to the wrong address might brick the laptop completely and EC/BIOS RESET CAN'T FIX THAT!<br/>

Reviewer: Mention of the ability to write the data into the EC should definitely be fused together with the warning, otherwise the first paragraph by itself reads "here's the data and you can edit it".

I think making the *whole* warning bold and the damage&brick part ALL CAPS would be scary enough (I edited the suggestion)

> DO NOT DO THAT: writing the wrong the values to the wrong address might brick the laptop completely and EC/BIOS RESET CAN'T FIX THAT!<br/>

Reviewer 2: Github have this and similar tags, so ve can use them to highlight some dangerous things

> [!IMPORTANT]
qq

> DO NOT DO THAT: writing the wrong the values to the wrong address might brick the laptop completely and EC/BIOS RESET CAN'T FIX THAT!<br/>

Reviewer: Caution looks like the right one, let's see

> [!CAUTION]
**Do not attempt to edit the memory manually**. Writing the wrong the values to the wrong addresses will **DAMAGE YOUR HARDWARE** or even **BRICK YOUR DEVICE**! This can't be reversed by resetting the EC or BIOS.

> DO NOT DO THAT: writing the wrong the values to the wrong address might brick the laptop completely and EC/BIOS RESET CAN'T FIX THAT!<br/>

Author: i just refreshed the page and the first thing that caught my eyes are the words in bold, lets keep the caution section because it looks good, but its not as eye catching as BIG **BOLD** words

> DO NOT DO THAT: writing the wrong the values to the wrong address might brick the laptop completely and EC/BIOS RESET CAN'T FIX THAT!<br/>

Reviewer 2: Nice.

![not apply changes](pics/support_guide/not_apply_changes.png)

10. Change the reading speed to 500-600ms,
this makes it easier to see how the

> values react to the MSI app settings:

Author: i agree

![refresh rate button](pics/support_guide/refresh_menu.png)

11. Reading addresses: lets say you are looking for a specific address
0x54 (0xFirstNumberSecondNumber) FirstNumber can be found
on the left side of the table and SecondNumber can be found on

> the top side of the table:

Author: this is way better, but lets call them numbers instead of digits, just to match it with the visual representation in the screenshot.

> the top side of the table:

Reviewer: Alright, sounds good

![hex editor how to](pics/support_guide/hex_editor_how_to.png)

Each **Address** contains a **Value**, when you locate an **Address** inside the
table you can write it like this 0x54 = 00 (**Address** = **Value**)
This **Value** can change depending on what it is related to, if you find the
**Address** for CPU temperature; the **Value** will change on its own, if you
find the **Address** for battery charge limit, then the **Value** won't change

> until you change the settings in the MSI app.

Author: shorter paragraphs are indeed easier to read

> Example: To figure out which **Address** is used by user scenario (`shift
> mode`) go to the user scenario page in the MSI app and keep changing it
> while looking at the EC table.
> 
> Eventually you'll notice a **Value** that changes each time you change the
> setting (or maybe two **Values** in two **Addresses** that change at the same
> time), once you find the **Address**, you can start writing down the **Value**
> for EACH user scenario, so you can report it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: To figure out which **Addresses** are used by user scenarios (or shift
modes) go to the user scenario page in the MSI app and keep switching the scenarios
while looking at the EC table.

Eventually you'll notice one or more values that change each time you change the
setting, once you find them, you can start writing down the addresses and values
corresponding to *each* user scenario, so you can report them.
```

Author: i abused words in bold here because i wanted it to be easier to understand

### Linux method

***

> This method has limited results compared to the Windows method, because most
> MSI laptop features are tied to software toggles that can be only found in their apps
> installed on windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method is very limited compared to the Windows method, because most
MSI EC features are tied to software toggles that can only be found in the official Windows apps.
```

Author: how do people know if a feature is actually an EC feature and not related to driver or software solutions on windows? lets keep the more generalized sentence on this one and we might avoid some confusion.

Reviewer: Sounds good!

If you are lucky, your laptop model will have similar addresses to another laptop
that is already supported by the driver, but usually this only happens on some
features like cooler boost and battery charge limit.

To start, You need to load a module called `ec_sys`:

* `sudo modprobe ec_sys`

if you need to write to a specific address (but you really shouldn’t) you can enable
Read/Write mode for this module:

* `sudo modprobe ec_sys write_support=1`

After that you can extract the EC table and print it on the terminal:

* `hexdump -C /sys/kernel/debug/ec/ec0/io`

or you can put it in a .txt file in your home folder directly:

* `cat /sys/kernel/debug/ec/ec0/io > ec.dump`

then you can send us the output, and wish us luck.

P.S: you should repeat the method you used after EACH BIOS/Firmware update, the reason you
shouldn’t update before following the guide is that the values and addresses could change after
updating, and it is important to support all versions of the BIOS/Firmware or the driver might

> not work after the update.

Author: curiosity was supposed to make the reader go through the guide from start to finish

Unload module if it was previously loaded:

+ `sudo modprobe -r msi-ec`

Load module with debug mode enabled:

+ `sudo modprobe msi-ec debug=true`

Make a dump by reading the module pseudo file:

+ `cat /sys/devices/platform/msi-ec/debug/ec_dump`

Or save it to file:

+ `cat /sys/devices/platform/msi-ec/debug/ec_dump > ec_dump.txt`

If you got the next error, then your module is not loaded in debug mode or doesn't have it:

> `cat: /sys/devices/platform/msi-ec/debug/ec_dump: No such file or directory`

## `EC-SYS` method

> [!NOTE]
> The `ec-sys` module may not be included in some distros, such as Fedora.

To start, You need to load a module called `ec_sys`:

* `sudo modprobe ec_sys`

[//]: # (If you need to write to a specific address &#40;but you really shouldn’t&#41; you can enable)
[//]: # (Read/Write mode for this module:)
[//]: # ()
[//]: # (* `sudo modprobe ec_sys write_support=1`)

After that you can extract the EC table and print it on the terminal in text form:

* `hexdump -C /sys/kernel/debug/ec/ec0/io`

Or save it to file:

+ `hexdump -C /sys/kernel/debug/ec/ec0/io > ec_dump.txt`

If you need dump in binary form:

> * `cat /sys/kernel/debug/ec/ec0/io > ec_dump.bin`

Reviewer: I don't think anyone does. At least, we don't need binaries submitted here, so let's exclude this part

# Intro
There are two main methods to get your MSI laptop supported: the recommended method requires Windows to be installed, and the other works directly on Linux.

> If there are any BIOS/firmware updates available for your laptop, follow this guide for your current firmware before installing any of them. Then repeat the process for each new firmware version you install from the official MSI website. This is required to obtain support for older firmware as the EC configuration may vary across the versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!IMPORTANT]
If there are any BIOS/firmware updates available for your laptop, follow this guide for your current firmware before installing any of them. Then repeat the process for each new firmware version you install from the official MSI website. This is required to obtain support for older firmware as the EC configuration may vary across the versions.
```

needed.

2. After a successful installation, make sure to download/install all
Windows updates from the settings
(windows can't update bios/firmware automatically on MSI
laptops but that doesn't mean you have to update them yourself,
instead continue following the guide).

3. Install the MSI app designed for your laptop: MSI dragon center /
MSI creator center / MSI center / MSI center pro (the correct app
can be found on the support page for your laptop).

4. If you fail at step 3, then you most likely need another app. usually
its AMD Adrenalin software / GeForce Experience (nvidia)/ or intel
equivalent.

5. Once the MSI app is installed, you can test the functions it offers,
like user scenario and battery charge limit.

6. If everything works as expected, download RWEverything:
https://rweverything.com/download/ ![download RWEverything](pics/support_guide/dl_rwe.png)

7.  Launch it as administrator:
![run as admin](pics/support_guide/run_as_admin.png)

8. Navigate to the EC tab (page):
![open ec tab](pics/support_guide/open_ec_tab.png)

9. Here you should see a table of all the values your Embedded Chip has in its memory.

> **Do not attempt to edit the memory manually. Writing the wrong the values to the wrong addresses will DAMAGE YOUR HARDWARE or even BRICK YOUR DEVICE! This can't be reversed by resetting the EC or BIOS.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!CAUTION]
**Do not attempt to edit the memory manually. Writing the wrong the values to the wrong addresses will DAMAGE YOUR HARDWARE or even BRICK YOUR DEVICE! This can't be reversed by resetting the EC or BIOS.**
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> If there are any BIOS/firmware updates available for your laptop, follow this guide for your current firmware before installing any of them. Then repeat the process for each new firmware version you install from the official MSI website. This is required to obtain support for older firmware as the EC configuration may vary across the versions.

# Table of contents (rough)

> + FW naming and WMI versioning explanation(?) (TODO)

Author: this is outside the scope of this guide, you've already done a good [write up](https://github.com/BeardOverflow/msi-ec/discussions/98) on that topic, so lets keep it outside this guide

Reviewer: Right, this is just a guide on how to obtain and interpret the dump

Reviewer: Alright, adding it here as a draft wouldn't hurt, we'll see how well it fits here when the guide is near finished

If you got the next error, then your module is not loaded in debug mode or doesn't have it:

> `cat: /sys/devices/platform/msi-ec/debug/ec_dump: No such file or directory`

### `EC-SYS` method

> [!NOTE]
> The `ec-sys` module may not be included in some distros, such as Fedora.

To start, You need to load a module called `ec_sys`:

* `sudo modprobe ec_sys`

[//]: # (If you need to write to a specific address &#40;but you really shouldn’t&#41; you can enable)
[//]: # (Read/Write mode for this module:)
[//]: # ()
[//]: # (* `sudo modprobe ec_sys write_support=1`)

After that you can extract the EC table and print it on the terminal in text form:

* `hexdump -C /sys/kernel/debug/ec/ec0/io`

Or save it to file:

+ `hexdump -C /sys/kernel/debug/ec/ec0/io > ec_dump.txt`

If you need dump in binary form:

* `cat /sys/kernel/debug/ec/ec0/io > ec_dump.bin`

### Reading the EC RAM mapped to system memory

Some devices have EC memory mapped to system memory address `0x0xFC000800`,
so you can read it from the `/dev/mem` pseudo file with `dd`.

`/dev/mem` may not be supported on some distros. For details, see `man mem`.

> [!WARNING]

> > Reading random parts of the system memory can reveal your secrets, so check the dump before you post it to Github.

Author: and how do i check if the dump i made doesn't include sensitive info? let's call this method "experimental" until we make sure it works no less than 90% of the time.

Reviewer 2: true, only by comparing with reference dump, like matching the location of the ec name

Reviewer 2: Actually, chance of getting reading error is higher than accidentally dump some confidential info. And maybe this memory area newer mapped to system RAM

Reviewer: Let's mark it as "Not recommended" and put the warning at the top of this method's section, so it can be the last resort if the two previous methods didn't work for some magical reason

To save EC memory in text form run:

+ `sudo dd if=/dev/mem bs=1 skip=4227860480 count=256 | hexdump -C > ec_dump.txt`

# Contribution

> ## Firmware naming

Author: this is a solid explanation , but it's better to put it in another documentation

Reviewer 2: We probably don't need more then 1 guide now

Reviewer: These should probably be in a separate guide.

Some people have been requesting a guide on adding a config to the code and I think it also doesn't belong in this file.

We can make a file with a "Contribution" guide that:

1. refers people to this guide if they want to contribute by discovering their laptops' configs (this is a separate file because it is big)
2. provides some specific info like FW naming and generations
3. explains how to add a config to the code

|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:-----------------------:|
| ${\color{red}xxxx}{\color{orange}b}{MS}{\color{yellow}n}{.}{\color{WildStrawberry}y}{\color{YellowOrange}zz}$ | ${E}{\color{red}xxxx}{\color{orange}b}{MS.}{\color{WildStrawberry}y}{\color{YellowOrange}zz}$ | Business/Creator/Gaming |
| ${\color{red}xxxx}{\color{orange}b}{WS}{\color{yellow}n}{.}{\color{WildStrawberry}y}{\color{YellowOrange}zz}$ | ${E}{\color{red}xxxx}{\color{orange}b}{WS.}{\color{WildStrawberry}y}{\color{YellowOrange}zz}$ | Workstation/CreatorPRO  |

+ ${\color{red}xxxx}$ - model code
+ ${\color{orange}b}$ - CPU/EC vendor
  + For BIOS:
    + A - AMD CPU
    + I - Intel CPU
  + For EC:
    + E - ENE
    + I - ITE
+ ${\color{yellow}n}$ - EC / board(?) model
+ ${\color{WildStrawberry}y}{\color{YellowOrange}zz}$ - version
  + ${\color{WildStrawberry}y}$ - board generation; firmware is incompatible if different
  + ${\color{YellowOrange}zz}$ - firmware version

> ## Firmware generations

Author: i don't see how this might help people discover addresses on their unsupported laptops

Reviewer 2: If people will compare with reference map they need to know how to check about generations
